High in this video we're going to talk about reducing functions.
So what are reducing functions what reducing functions are functions that recombine and iterable recursively
ending up of a single return.
Van they're also called accumulators aggregators or sometimes even folding functions.
I'm just going to keep referring to them as reducing functions.
But let's look at an example that will make it quite clear as to what this means and what's going on.
For example we want to find the maximum value and then iterable that's a reducing function.
It's taking a sequence or an iterable in more general terms.
And from that it's giving us a single value back based on all the elements in that sequence so essentially
it's a mapping right from an iterable to a value and it's a mapping that happens in a very specific
way.
So let's take a look at an example.
How might we find the maximum in a sequence.
So our sequence let's say we have and values from 0 to a and minus one.
So here I'm indexing which is why I'm calling this a sequence not just an iterable.
There's a Z all kind of there's a notion of order in this so we can take elements out we can talk about
the first element the second element and so on.
Next let's define a small function that is going to take two parameters A and B.
And it's going to return the maximum value of those two arguments.
So that's all it does.
Just returns the max of two values.
Now let's do this let's say that we want to find the maximum of iterable.
So we want to end up with a result that's going to be the maximum of all the values in this sequence.
We start by setting a result equal to the first element.
Right.
That's usually how you're going to find a max in the list are you going to say OK we'll make the maximum
equal to the first element.
That might be correct.
And then what do you do you look at every element thereafter and you check.
Is it bigger.
If it is well OK that's the biggest element and you keep going till you've exhausted the list.
So we're going to do that exactly here.
We're going to say result is the maximum of that result the current one which is a zero with a 1 and
whichever one is bigger.
We're going to put that into the result and say well that's the maximum now.
And we're going to keep doing that for every element in the sequence.
So after we've done that and exhausted all the elements of the sequence we've essentially found the
maximum value in that sequence.
So you can see what's happening is that we're just applying the max value recursively or it critically
right.
We're doing it multiple times and I'm saying recursive because what's result here.
Well it's the previous one.
But what's the result here.
It's the max.
Right so this is the max of the MAX a result.
A come one with a comma too.
So you can think of this as a recursion but think of it in terms of loops.
That's probably going to be simpler for now.
So this allows us to find the maximum value in that sequence.
Now we haven't studied it troubles in general so I'm going to stick to sequences in all the examples
I do but as we'll see later on this will actually work with any iterable not just sequences so using
a loop.
Let's actually write this out in code using a loop.
So we'll start with a list right.
This is the list we're going to define this function called max value and it's basically just a small
lambda function and it's going to take two arguments.
So again this is critical it's always two arguments.
And what is it going to return.
What's going to return a if is greater than be otherwise it's going to be basically it's going to return
the maximum of those two values next.
Let's look at the code.
Let's define this function Max sequence it takes in a parameter called sequence which is which will
pass you know l as an argument when we call this function.
And what does it do.
It says result is sequence 0.
Right.
So in other words result equals five.
That's the false element.
Now we're going to loop through every element in sequence.
And for every element in sequence starting at 1 right we're not going to redo the first one there's
no need.
We've already handled it.
It's a nine hour result.
So we always start at the second element and we're going to set the result equal to the maximum value
of our previous result with each.
So in this case we're going to set the result to the maximum of five which is our current result and
8 so 8 being the second element here.
Right.
Or the first element in this loop but that's we start the loop at the second elements or we're at 8.
So the result is eight.
We do that again.
So now we say result is the max of 8 and 6 which is the next value in our sequence.
So the result is still eight.
We do that again and we take a max of eight with the next value in the sequence which is 10.
So now we get a value of 10 for our maximum for our result and we do that again and we take the max
of 10 and 9 will a max of 10 and nine is four tenths or result is 10.
And that's it we're done with the loop.
And now we return the result which is 10 which happens to be the maximum value in the sequence.
Notice the sequence of steps we initialize our result to five.
Next we set our result was equal to the maximum of five and eight.
The next element in the sequence that gave us some value 8 that's now on your result we now apply this
again and we say take the max of the current result and 6 while the max with the current result occurs
with all these 8 6 max to 8.
So now our current result on you current result is 8 again.
Rinse and repeat max of eight.
That eight here that we obtained in the previous step with 10.
Now the max is 10.
The result is 10.
And we applied one small max of 10 and 9.
And that result is 10.
And that's what we return because we're done we've exhausted the list all the iterable.
So the result is 10 and that is the maximum of that list.
So it's pretty straightforward if you think of it in terms of that loop that we wrote in that code so
we could do the same thing for other things.
Let's say we want to find the minimum.
Well the only thing that we need to do to find the minimum instead of using a function that returns
the maximum of two values.
We're going to use a function that returns the minimum of two values for every time we're going to find
something that's smaller potentially.
So how would we do it.
Well this is the same code as before.
The only difference is that I've renamed this function here.
And the function that I'm applying inside the loop is the main value function.
This function here.
It's not that Max Battey.
That's the only difference.
Everything else stayed the same.
So we could do this instead.
Right.
You start to see a pattern that everything changed.
Everything stays the same.
The only thing that changes is meant value.
So let's write a reduced function that's a little bit more general.
And we're going to need to know what the function is.
So we're going to need to pass it as a parameter as an argument to this function.
So the parameter F and we'll take the function and then the sequence will be what it was before.
What is the sequence that we want to apply this to.
And then our code will be identical result it sequence 0 4 x in sequence one result equals.
And now this is the key difference.
We're going to take f n and apply that.
Right so we're not going to pass.
We're not going to hard code the function that we're using.
We're just going to pass that as an argument and then once we're done we return the result.
So if we call underscore reduce with this lambda a greater than B else b.
What is this lambda do it returns the maximum right of a and b.
So this will give us the maximum of the list and if we use the other lambda that we saw before is less
than B else b that's calculating the minimum of two values.
We'll end up with the minimum of the list what about adding all the elements.
We can also reduce by adding all the elements in a sequence or in iterable in general well we just need
to define a lambda a function that basically adds its two arguments.
So let's do that let's apply to L.
So let's run this code and let's see if we run through this code what's happening right.
So this code is the same as that reduce function that we just wrote.
I haven't changed that at all.
The only thing I've changed is that we're going to pass that and function right for the function in
this underscore reduce function.
So if we call underscore Rhodes-Hughes ads come El what happens when I step through it.
The result is going to be sequence 0.
So the result is going to be five.
Next we're in the loop now and we're going to add functions.
And right that's what we're past.
We're going to add results with eight.
So we're going to add five and eight and that's going to be on your result that's going to be 13.
Rinse and repeat.
We now move on to six and we're going to add the previous results 13 with 6 that's 19.
You see are we creating this cumulative sum would do that one more time.
We have 19 the previous result and then we get 29 and for the last element and the last iteration in
this loop we're going to take 29 and add that to 9.
And so we end up with 38.
That's all result.
That's what gets returned.
And that is the sum of all the elements in this list.
So this reduce is a really important kind of concept it's an important function and Python actually
has it for us.
We don't have to write it ourselves.
I created this underscore redos to help you understand how it works.
But Python has it and it doesn't have the restriction of only you being you know able to specify sequence
types.
You can use any kind of iterable.
We had to stick to a sequence because we were using indexing and the slicing right.
We had to sequence 0.
That was an index and then we had you know four x in sequence one colon that was a slice.
You can only do that with sequence types and you can't do that let's say with a set that won't work.
However Python's reduced function will work with sets as well and we'll see that in the code where we
switch to that so we would have to import it from the phunk tools module.
That's where it resides in the frontals module.
So let's do this again with our example not here I'm using a list which is a sequence type.
But again we don't have to use a sequence type.
And now I'm calling Python's reduce.
And you'll notice that's why I called my reduced function underscore reduce to so I'm not stepping over
the toes of this reduce function otherwise I might be shadowing its $5 from frontals import reduce and
then later on I do a def reduce or guess what whenever you call reduce it's going to call your definition
your implementation of reduce not pythons.
So it's generally a good idea not to use Python's methods in your method names for your function names
and also go ahead and just put an underscore in front.
That works just as easily or call it something else.
Whatever but the underscore is fairly common.
So if we call reduce just as before we're calling with this lambda here that's going to return the maximum
of a and b and we apply that to L and it's going to give us the maximum which is going to be 10 Similarly
if we use Alamdar that's returning the minimum of a and b then when we do that it's going to return
the minimum just as before.
Except we're using pythons built in reduce again.
We can also use an addition for the lambda function and it's just going to return Therefore the sum
of everything in that list so reduce works on any iterable.
As I mentioned I may just show you that now if we have a set this wouldn't walk of the underscore reduce
that will fail because this is a set.
And you can find you know the zero element of a set.
There is no such concept.
But now by phone reduce that will work just fine.
So if we do this we're again looking for the minimum and it will work and return the minimum of that
set which is to now we can also apply to other things like for example a string.
A string is a sequence type.
It's a sequence of characters.
So our underscore reduce function would actually work.
In this case and all we're doing here is we're finding the minimum Well what does it mean when we talk
about the minimum of characters while we're talking about lexicographical ordering.
So if you think of the ASCII table for example that's lexicographically ordered on characters and it
will actually work out the same thing here or the same way.
So the smallest character in here is going to be h.
That's going to have the lowest character code.
If you want to think of it that way.
So when we apply reduce to that we are going to get H-back because that is the smallest element.
We can also do something like this.
This is kind of a little different and it's still a reducing function but what is it doing.
Let's take a look.
Ahlam the hinge is saying a plus a space plus B.
So we doing string concatenation here.
That's why I'm passing in strings.
So I'm here I'm passing a tuple which again is an admirable.
And so the first element is python.
So Python and then what are we going to do.
Well that's going to be all results are going to be Python Plus a space plus the next element.
So Plus is so we're going to get Python space is and we apply again again going to get Python.
Space is space awesome.
And so we end up with Python is awesome.
Now there's actually a better way of doing this.
Add the string when we get to the string library and the string data type later on in the course.
We'll see.
But there is a join method.
In string objects that we can use instead.
But I just want to show you that you can get something that you may not have expected.
Also by using a reduce right here we're just concatenated strings together.
OK.
So let's look at some of the built in reducing functions because Python has a few built in functions
of a built in reducing functions.
It's got a lot of built in functions.
But if you are reducing functions joined is one that I just mentioned but we have some other ones as
well.
Like men it's so common to try and find the minimum value in an interval that's built in.
You don't even have to import it.
It's just right.
Built into the standard library.
And so we get this men of this list will return the minimum.
So we don't have to do reduce and then the lambda none of that.
It's just built in something with Max.
Max is built in that will return the maximum inside that iterable sum is also defined.
It's so common to try and add up all the elements of an interval that's built it as well.
So if we call some of some iterable in this case the list will get the sum of all the elements in that
iterable.
In this case 38 now we have two more.
And these are related to boolean expressions.
So we have any and all.
So let's look at any force than any is defined this way.
You call it by saying any and then you're iterable and it will return true if any element in L is truthy
it will return false otherwise.
And all is called by all with whatever iterable and it will return true if every element in L is truthy
and false otherwise.
So what's happening with any and all is that it's looking at the truth value of each element in your
iterable.
And in any case it will return true if any of them are truthy.
So basically it's doing an on between the truth values of every element in your iterable and returning
that result the all on the other hand is putting an end between all the values.
So if every element in L is truthy.
So if the true value of element 1 and the true value of element 2 and the truth value of element 3 and
so on is true that's what gets returned true.
So that's a reduction as well.
Let's see how we might actually implement it ourselves using the reduced function.
So let's say if we start with a sequence 0 empty string none and 100 0 has a truth value.
False that's false see the empty string is also falsie.
None is falsie and 100 is truthy.
So if we were to look at our result and make that equal to the truth value of zero all the truth value
of the empty string and so on while we get true or true or false sorry we get false or false or false
or true the whole thing will be true.
Right.
So our results will be true.
Now note that I'm not doing zero or empty string or not or 100 because if you remember what we did when
we looked at the boolean operators that's not going to return a boolean value that's actually going
to return one of the elements in the owners.
And in this case it's going to return 100 because that's the first truthy value.
Right.
So be careful with that.
That's not what we want.
We actually want to return a true or false.
We don't want to return the element.
In this case so we're going to cast everything to a book we're going to basically look at the truth
value first and then do the.
So you'll see what are we doing repeatedly.
We're taking two values.
We're looking at the truth value of both values and we're offering them and we're doing that repeatedly.
While that's a reduction we're reducing.
So we do this right would say result equals bulat zero.
That would be false.
Next we say result equals result.
All bull of the empty string.
While bull of empty string is false.
So we have false or false.
That's false.
Then we have result equals our previous result which was false or Bush have none.
Well again Bill not his fault so we have false or false that's false.
And then the last element we handled that would have resulted result or Bush of 100 of 100 is true 100
is truthy.
So we have now false or true.
So the net effect is that result is not equal to true.
And so that's what we return so we can do this now by just using Roger's right.
We see this pattern here and we know what it means.
Right.
Even this pattern here by now you should start realizing we can use or reduce this.
So what are we going to pass for the function.
Well we're going to pass this now lambda is going to take two parameters A and B and it's going to look
at the truth value of a or the truth value of b and then we'll apply it in this case to the list.
When we do that we get true as well.
So this is the same thing as any and is just an implementation for us.
So we don't have to go through this.
But that's how you would implement it yourself.
And you can do the same thing with all as well of course.
So let's look at a another example which is finding all the product or the funding the product of all
the elements in an iterable that's not built into Python.
The sum is but not the product.
Sometimes you may want to do that.
So let's see how we might do that.
So it's very similar to adding.
Right.
The difference is that let's say for this list here we just want to find the multiplication right instead
of doing a sum instead of doing an addition we want to find the product of all the elements in this
list.
So as you might think all we need to do is just change all Lamda all and as the product right a times
b and then we apply that to the sequence.
L So what's our results.
Our result starts with one that gets initialized to the first element of the sequence.
Next weeks go into a loop that basically will iterate through the remaining elements of the iterable
and we're going to multiply it with the previous result.
So the next result is going to be the previous result times 3 which is 3.
The next result is going to be the previous result times five or previous result was three so three
times by 15 and once more our next result is going to be the previous result times six.
The last element in the sequence.
So we have 15 times 6 which is 90 and so we end up with the product of 1 3 5 and 6.
So that's how you might find the product of elements and iterable.
So of course this has actually an application we can calculate and factorial using that.
Let's take a look at what end factorial is.
Just to refresh your memory it's one times two times three all the way up to N right.
So we're multiplying the sequence of numbers 1 2 3 up to N right.
So for example 5 5 factorial would be one times two times three times four times five.
So if we look at this range function if we look at the range starting at 1 and ending but not including
six that will generate basically an iterable containing 1 2 3 4 5.
Right.
That's going to generate the sequence of numbers 1 2 3 4 and 5.
If we can then multiply all these numbers together we've just calculated 5 factorial in general we do
range from 1 to plus 1 will end up with a sequence of numbers from 1 up to an so to calculate and factorial
we just find the product of all the elements in the range of well that straightforward.
We have a reduced function so we call reduce the function we use is going to be this eight times B which
is multiplying and we pass in the range.
So for five factorial with passen six you know a range of 1 to 6 and that will actually calculate five
factors.
We didn't have to write the recursive function in this case.
We use Reduce which has kind of all that built in for us already.
OK.
So the last thing that I want to mention is that the reduced function actually has an initializer.
And in the code I'll show you how we might implement something like that ourselves.
Although I won't do a full implementation of it but the reduced function has a third optional parameter
that defaults to none.
Which is why we haven't talked about it so far.
And you can think of it essentially as adding something to the front of the iterable.
Remember in the code when we wrote our own reduce We had an initializer.
Right we were initializing the result to the first element of the sequence or the first element of the
iterable what the initialiser does in the reduced function in Python.
It basically overrides that and say No no don't use the first element right as your initial value for
result.
Use this.
Initialize a value instead and then do the same thing but apply to all the elements of the iterable.
So it's like adding a value.
Basically ahead of the remaining troubles ahead of the you know elements of the troubles and then Python
will use that as its start value as it start doing its recursion.
So it's often used to handle the case when you iterable is empty because what happens if we have this
piece of code where L is an empty list and then we call reduce We want to add all the elements in.
L. Well if we do that then we're going to get an exception.
We're going to get a runtime error.
Python is going to basically bark at us and say oh I can't do this because this is empty.
So to avoid that problem we pass it the initializers and we tell it hey use an initializer of one.
In this case I'm saying use an initializer of one.
Now we're going to be a little careful in this case what's going to happen.
Well the list is empty.
So it's been written one.
Because that was the initial value of that result.
So it's going to return one.
But now you have to be careful because if it's not empty then that's how list as one to three and we
give it an initializer of 1.
Remember that we are essentially adding this with putting this in front of everything and saying that's
the initial value.
So the initial value is not this one over here.
It's this one over here.
So in fact we're going to end up adding one plus one plus two plus three.
And so we would get a result of seven.
But just to make it clear let's say that I specified the initializer to be 100 then what we would have
would be a 100.
As our initial value plus everything else that's in the list.
So in this case we'll end up with a 106.
So be careful with the initialiser.
Right.
So to do a summation of a list I would not use an initializer of 1 or 100.
I would use an initialiser 0 because it won't affect the sum.
If something is in there zero plus one plus two plus three will still be six.
If the list is empty it will give me 0 back in the case of a product.
Let's say I want to find the product of everything I would use an initialiser of one because one isn't
going to modify the product of 1 2 and 3 but if my list is empty it will return a one that may not be
what I want.
In which case I'd have to put an if statement in front of that and test for it.
And so.
So be careful with initialiser.
So with that said let's jump into some code and see how all that works.
Thanks for watching.
I'll see you in a bit.